
# Working with documents

In this chapter we will discuss some of the more advanced features in VisCon. We will begin by explaining how to import and export documents, then you will learn how to work with multiple documents and how to preview one or more documents. At last we will look at the preferences dialog

## Importing documents into VisCon

You import a document by doing the following:

1. Go to the file menu and choose "Open" or "Open from URL." Alternatively, you can press command-o on Mac or control+o on Windows to get the open dialog box.
2. Find the file that you want to open in VisCon
3. Choose "Open" or if you are using the keyboard press enter/return on the filename.
4. Now the file is opened and imported into VisCon.

As soon as you open a supported file format that isn't plain text (.txt or any markdown format) VisCon will recognize the file format and import it. When VisCon imports a document it will convert it from its format into Markdown. The result is that you will see the converted document inside VisCon after a few seconds. Note that fonts and other special formating is ignored at the moment.

You may wonder why VisCon automatically imports your document and converts it into Markdown. The reason for doing so is for ensuring that all the structure is stored even after the conversion. By structure, we are specifically referring to headings, lists, links, paragraphs and so on.

If you ever have collaborated with others, using different word processors, you may have encountered how frustrating it is when some of the layout has changed as soon as one updated the document. If you import (or open) the document in VisCon you will know that all of the structure is kept. You can edit the content of the document and preview the result of your work in your favorite web browser.

If you are working with someone and they update the document you both are working on via a Cloud storage provider, it is very easy for you to get the changes they made.

1. When you know the document is updated, simply just move to your desktop or any other open application and back to VisCon again.
2. VisCon shows you a dialog saying that the document you are viewing has been changed. You are now given the option to reload the document.
3. If you choose "Yes," your document is reloaded and all changes are present.
4. If you choose "No," then your currently edited version stays present.

Note: If you both write in the same document at the same time and save conflicts will almost happen. VisCon can not avoid this. But it can certainly help you track changes in documents. We therefore, recommend that you find a workflow where conflicts aren't likely to happen. For example: Let the other person make suggestions in the document and wait for it to be updated via the cloud. Then reload their version of the document with VisCon and make your edits. The other person must **NOT** save or edit the document until you are finish editing. When your changes are saved the other person can simply reload your version of the document, and both of your edits are intact. But be careful!

## Exporting documents from VisCon

You export a document from VisCon by doing the following:

1. Go to the file menu and select "Save as" or press commando-shift-s on mac or Control+shift+s on Windows.
2. A standard save as-dialog box will be shown. Here you can decide the filename for the document, the document format and where to save it.
3. Press enter/return to activate the save button or simply click the "Save" button when you are ready to save your document.

If you choose any other format than Markdown or plain text, the export will start automatically.
VisCon checks your content of the document and exports it to the chosen format.

### Important when importing and exporting documents

**Important**: Please read this paragraph carefully before importing and exporting documents with VisCon. We have found some limitations and issues which we have listed below.

* After importing a document, VisCon will remember the filename and format. It is therefore easy to save the document but by mistake overwrite the original version of the document unintentionally. Therefore we strongly recommend that you save your edited document as plain text or Markdown.
* If you import a HTML-document into VisCon you may see some metadata like title, generated by etc. It is safe to remove this text if you just want the important content. VisCon will automatically create the necessary metadata next time you export the document.
* When converting to Markdown you may notice some indentations in lists. This is due to the way VisCon at the moment converts Markdown. We are working on fixing this. You should know however, that if you encounter any changes in Markdown formating that this will not affect your result when converting to HTML, Microsoft Word or any other format.

	## Working with multiple documents

VisCon allows you to switch between open documents. When you launch VisCon you will always see a new, empty document "New 1." From here you can just start writing, or you can simply open an existing document.

If you want to, you can always make a new document. VisCon then creates a new document.

You can see all open documents by pressing control+tab on either Mac or Windows. When you do so, VisCon shows a list of all the documents you have opened since you launched VisCon. Just locate the document you want, and press enter/return or click the "OK" button.

At the bottom of the list, there is a "New" option, which you can choose if you want to make a new document without leaving the list of open documents.

## Previewing a document from VisCon

At some point you may want to watch your document and your progress. Go to the tools menu and select "Preview." You can alternatively press command-p on mac or Control+p on Windows.

VisCon will then convert your document to HTML, and open it in your default web browser of choice. If you want to change anything after you have watched the result in your browser, just go back to VisCon and make the change. Now, you can go back to your browser and refresh the page. Your changes are shown immediately. This is especially good if you just want to practice your Markdown skills and don't need to save your document before previewing the result.

You can copy some or all the text with formating from your browser as you normally would, and paste the content into another application of choice.

Let's say you want to make an email with headings and a bulleted list. Just write the message with the appropriated headings and bullet points inside VisCon and preview the result. When you open your browser with control+P or Command-P, you can just review the result, and at last copy it into your favorite mail client of choice and send it.

Note: VisCon will always clear the files you preview in your web browser as soon as you quit VisCon and shut your browser down. No data is sent outside your computer, so previewing a document can be done even if you have no internet connection.

## Preferences dialog {#viscon-preferences}

You can customise VisCon through the preferences dialog. The categories are placed in a combobox.
The preferences dialog consists of the following categories which are explained in the next paragraphs. After setting the preferences the way you like, simply press the "OK" button to save your changes, or press "Cancel" to discard all the changes you have made.

### General preferences

The general preferences consists of the following settings:

* Show changelog after updating. If this checkbox is checked VisCon will automatically display the changelog after an update has ben installed.
* Enable spell checker: If this checkbox is checked it is possible to spell check documents in VisCon.

	Note: This is currently only available on the Mac OS version of VisCon.
* Language: Here you will find a list of languages which VisCon supports. In order for the language to change, you must exit VisCon and open it again. After you press OK in the preferences dialog, VisCon will ask you to restart if the language has ben changed.

	Note: For any other language than English the translations are autogenerated. If you encounter mistakes, please [contact us](https://visconapp.com/contact)

### Advanced preferences

The advanced category consists of the following items:

* Enable debug mode: When debug mode is enabled VisCon will log extra information to the log file. This is useful if you encounter a bug or if VisCon shows you an error message. If this checkbox is unchecked no log file will be generated, and if an error shows up VisCon will not show as many details.
* Text wrap: Allows the following options for text wrapping:
	- Default: Wrap the lines at word boundaries or at any other character if there are words longer than the window width.
	- Word Wrapping: Wrap the lines too long to be shown entirely at word boundaries.
	- Character Wrapping: Wrap the lines too long to be shown entirely at any position.
	- Don't Wrap: don't wrap at all, show horizontal scrollbar instead. When this option is selected, you will move down until there is a line break. A line break is defined as a newline, that means a press on the enter/return key on your keyboard.
* Encoding to use when opening text and markdown files: By default the default setting "Respect the files original encoding" is recommended. If you change this option to any other format VisCon will try to open any markdown or txt-file with the selected text encoding. But in cases where the encoding does not match the file you are opening, you will get a warning saying that VisCon could not open the file with the preferred text encoding. VisCon asks if it should try to guess the correct text encoding for you. If you press "Yes", VisCon will try to guess the right encoding. If you press "No", you will return to the main window, and you will need to change your preference here.
* Encoding to use when saving text and markdown files: By default the default setting "Respect the files original encoding" is recommended. If you change this to any other text encoding, VisCon will automatically save your Markdown or txt-file as the text encoding you have selected here. This is useful if you want to preview a document, but want to preserve a specific text encoding.

Note: Regardless of your preferences for opening and saving Markdown and txt-files, VisCon will always convert your opened documents to UTF-8 when you preview and edit the document. In almost any case this should not pose any problems at all. This is done, so the preview feature can handle your document. VisCon will always respect the encoding you select for saving, so when you save your document, it is automatically converted to the encoding you chose in preferences for saving.
